[AUDIO LOGO]
[THEME MUSIC]
>>REGINA MEREDITH:
You may not be aware,
but medically
induced comas are now
a common way of dealing
with the tough cases
that medical staff
don't have the time
to deal with once a person
is in critical shape.
This was exacerbated by
COVID and intubation.
The problem is that
the medical industry
has no idea of what that person
is actually experiencing.
Alan Pearce became alarmed
at this growing problem
and dove into coma
research and where one
goes when they're lying there.
And thank you so much
for being with us today.
>>ALAN PEARCE: Thank
you for having me.
>>REGINA: Your book is called
"Coma," aptly, of course.
And so before we get into the
subject of comas themselves,
what is it that alerted you?
What happened that made you
dive into this particular topic,
as a very seasoned journalist?
>>PEARCE: Well, it was COVID.
I think, like a lot of people,
we had time on our hands.
I was watching more TV news
than was healthy for me.
And I started to wonder why so
many people around the world
were being placed into medically
induced comas with COVID.
I just wanted to know,
how does that work?
Must be a good thing.
And then I started to
wonder, what would they
experience within their coma?
So I just started researching.
And the straight answer is that
a coma is an essential tool
in critical care, has been
for the last 50 years,
and it enables a deeper,
restorative form of sleep that
enables the medication and
nature to do their job,
and that within a coma, it
should be an utter blank.
It didn't take me long to find
out that none of that is true.
>>REGINA: Not so.
OK.
And so, people were being put
in medically induced comas right
and left during COVID, because
so many people were intubated.
And we've all heard the
story of intubation.
A lot of those
people don't make it.
>>PEARCE: Well, the thing is
that most doctors and nurses
wholeheartedly believe that
a patient on a mechanical
ventilator must be knocked
unconscious because it's just
too an appalling an
experience that they--
>>REGINA: Because of having
this down their throat,
that it would be too painful
and their body would start
trying to reject it if
they were conscious?
>>PEARCE: That's the theory.
However, there are doctors and
nurses that do put people--
they do knock them out, but
for like 10, 20 minutes.
And they tell them ahead of
time what they're going to do.
And then they bring
them out gently.
And they adjust to
it in the same way
that you and I never
think about our breathing
on a day-to-day basis.
When you come out of your
coma, when you come out
of this induced coma, you are
conscious of your breathing.
And the simple thing to
do is just calm someone
down, distract them.
And then automatically, the
mind will just take over.
And it becomes an
automatic process.
And people can get on.
They can watch TV.
They can run a business
on their laptop.
They can text doctors and
nurses on their phone.
>>REGINA: While being intubated?
>>PEARCE: Yeah, indeed.
And the other thing is you
can get them up and walk them
around, because it turns out
that the immobility that people
experience within a coma
for months at a time
is really lethal.
The damage that it's caused--
just one week of bed rest has
proven to cause 40%--
four zero-- of muscle loss.
So if you've been in a
coma for, say, two months,
well, your diaphragm
muscles are not working.
Your heart muscles
are not working.
You can't swallow because all
your throat muscles are not
working.
You need an awful
lot of aftercare.
Whereas if you hadn't
put somebody into a coma
for so long, they can walk out
of that intensive care unit
and not be pushed to facilities
further and further down
the line and have ruined lives.
They never get well again.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Well, OK.
So this really took you
down a different road
than you were expecting because
you were just researching
the instance of
coma, intubation,
and blah, blah, blah,
and then finding out now,
as you go deeper, where
people actually go.
You did a lot of case studies.
We're going to bring some
up that are quite dramatic.
And it took you into the
realm of consciousness,
parallel realities,
reincarnation.
It took you all kinds of places
you weren't planning on going.
>>PEARCE: No, I wasn't.
And the thing is that no
doctor understands it.
>>REGINA: No.
>>PEARCE: So when people
try and talk about it,
they're dismissed.
They're told they've
had a false memory.
And it makes them crazy.
And they already
think they've gone mad
because they've
experienced things that
are beyond the imagination.
So when a doctor says,
you've had a false memory,
or, you hallucinated, it
makes no sense to them.
They have no satisfaction, that
they're just left confused,
utterly confused.
>>REGINA: Oh, it creates
a cognitive dissonance
that can't ever be repaired,
really, because they know it.
They lived it.
And I think a lot of people
watching, myself included,
have known people and been
sitting beside people who are
in comas for various reasons.
And my own mother was in a coma.
And she was not
intubated because they
knew she wouldn't
make it, ultimately--
an aneurysm at the brain stem.
But she lived 11 days.
And I'd watch how the
involuntary movements happen.
And it looks like they're
stretching and waking up,
but they're not, which freaks
everyone out and gives you
tears of hope only to
find out it's involuntary.
But I wondered.
I kept wondering,
and ultimately did
connect with her
outside of her body.
And she was telling me things
that turned out to be accurate.
She was there.
I just had to go into
a different realm
to communicate with her.
She was watching us, but
not in the way we think.
So let's go into that
part of the story.
>>PEARCE: Well,
many times, people
have told me that they're
outside of their body.
>>REGINA: Yes, I saw
her outside her body.
>>PEARCE: They will
find themselves looking
at their body, not even
confused by it, necessarily,
somehow accepting it.
Sometimes if you're
on the operating table
and the doctors think
you're out cold,
and you're aware of everything
that's happening to you--
you may not necessarily
feel the pain,
but you're aware of everything
that's happening to you.
And doctors and nurses
don't accept that.
And they don't accept
it within a coma.
And some people
within a coma, they're
aware of everything that's
happening around them.
Some kind of "locked
in" syndrome.
Doctors and nurses will discuss
their case in front of them,
say things like, "I don't
think she's going to survive
the night," and whatever.
And they can hear this.
This is horrifying.
They should never be doing that.
>>REGINA: That's why it's
so important that you're
talking about this
because there really
isn't much out there on this.
>>PEARCE: There's nothing.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>PEARCE: We are the first
people to explore this.
>>REGINA: It's
happening all the time.
Many people, even
the elderly, who
often slip into a
coma for a few days
before they die-- it's so
important to know they're
right there with you
for the most part.
But there are
circumstances where
they can be elsewhere, too.
>>PEARCE: Well, there's
different levels.
It's not as if there's a
one-size-fits-all coma tablet.
And the medication
they give people
has different effects
on different people.
So some people may be
just hovering there
beneath the surface, aware
of everything around them,
but unable to blink or scream.
Others just find
themselves in darkness,
like a mind in darkness not
knowing what's happening.
One girl, she was
14 at the time.
And she kept thinking,
when's my mummy going to come
and wake me up?
When's mummy going to come?
And she was stuck like that
for what felt like an eternity.
Other people go off
to alternate lives.
In some cases, you may be
in hospital for two weeks.
And they're experiencing an
alternate life spanning decades.
When I say experiencing,
I mean minute by minute,
actually having a full life--
holding down jobs, having
kids, getting married, going
on vacation.
>>REGINA: We're going to
get into a very specific one
of those, which is
absolutely fascinating.
And we have time to let you
tell us the whole story.
His name is Nick McDonald.
Yeah, Nick McDonald.
Others are having what appear
to be near-death experiences.
Let's cover that first.
>>PEARCE: Well,
near-death experiences,
as most people believe,
it is a beautiful thing.
You may be in a
bucolic landscape.
You may be meeting
your dead relatives.
You may be feeling
more at peace,
more comfortable than you've
ever felt in your life.
For sure, people within a coma
have recounted that to me.
Others recount a
really dark side.
I guess it's a near-death
experience of sorts.
But people find themselves
trapped in other worlds.
For example, one guy, James,
was forced to watch his wife--
and he's not even
married in this world--
watching his wife dying in
childbirth over and over again.
He's in the room and he
has to keep watching it
over and over again.
And oftentimes, when they
try and bring somebody out
of a coma, they reduce the meds.
And when they come out, they
come out biting and fighting,
desperate to cling
on to this world
and not go back to that world.
When they do that, doctors
consider them agitated and they
turn back up the medicine.
And they push them
straight back.
So someone like James
will go straight back
to watch his wife
trapped and dying
in childbirth over and
over and over again.
He's stuck there,
cannot get out of that.
That's one example.
>>REGINA: Well so, really, what
you're-- some viewers might be
saying it's as though they're
dropping into parallel
realities.
Now, the more we go into quantum
physics and the understanding
and nature of time
essentially being non-linear--
space isn't what we think it is.
When we start going
that direction
and start opening
up to the notion
that we may be living parallel
lives simultaneously from past,
future, and present--
>>PEARCE: Well, thanks to the
research into quantum science,
we can now take these
things seriously.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>PEARCE: Because
before that, it
was all dismissed as a
delusion, the product of a,
I don't know, a drugged-up
mind or whatever.
But they're not.
People are really
going to places.
And they're going places where
the mystics and the gurus
and the shaman have always been
going and always sought to go.
And the stories that
they come back with
are the stories coma
survivors are telling me.
They're going to heaven,
they're going to hell,
and they're going to
points in between.
And they are experiencing
alternate lives.
And I'm of the opinion
that these are past lives
that they're recounting.
Sometimes they recount
an entire life.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>PEARCE: All the details.
Sometimes people would list
not so much an alternate life,
but alternate deaths--
one after another after
another, sometimes
with themes such as drowning.
James, who I
mentioned earlier, he
had a series of deaths
involving water.
He was a Spitfire fighter
pilot in World War II.
He crashed his plane into
the Thames and drowned.
He was a fisherman
unloading fish in a dock.
He had an accident, fell
in the water, drowned.
Another time, he was placed
in a metal box as a torture.
It was filled with water.
He drowned.
And he could just go on and
on and on listing these.
>>REGINA: And so when
he came out of his coma,
he started sharing this?
>>PEARCE: No.
No one likes to share this.
>>REGINA: Right.
So how did James, as one person,
ultimately end up sharing this?
>>PEARCE: Because I
got to know James.
I spent time with James.
We got confident
with each other,
comfortable with each other.
And he opened up to me.
Most people who've
come out of a coma
and had these
experiences honestly
believe they've gone mad.
Almost everyone.
We've had 20-plus people helping
us specifically working with
the book.
Only two never said
they went mad, had
thought they'd gone mad.
>>REGINA: Really?
>>PEARCE: And
there's no answers.
There is no answer.
I find some people on, say,
Facebook coma survivor groups,
they are aware that
they're not alone.
But not everybody is lucky
enough to find these groups.
And they are alone.
And if they talk to their
family and they say,
I had an alternate
life spanning decades,
they're going to say to
them, but hold on, dear.
You were drugged up to the
eyeballs until recently.
What do you expect?
But here's the thing.
There's no drug or
cocktail of drugs
that anyone knows
of that can give you
an alternate life spanning
decades, because if there were,
we would all know about it.
>>REGINA: Right.
OK, so let's go into Nick
McDonald's life on Earth
before the coma.
Let's talk about how he ended up
in the coma, how long the coma
lasted, and most
importantly, the life he
was living while he
was supposedly nowhere.
>>PEARCE: Yeah.
Nick had a fairly normal
life, as lives go.
He owns and operates
his own pizza parlor.
And he contracted pneumonia
and went into hospital.
That turned to sepsis,
which is really dangerous.
That leads to organ failure
if you're not careful.
And so they placed
him-- what they
thought was the best thing
they could possibly do--
into a medically induced coma.
He was there for two weeks.
During that time, he experienced
a whole other life set
in the 1960s and the 1970s
in America's Midwest.
At one point, he was
called up to join
the US Army to go and fight an
alternate Southeast Asian War.
And when I talked to him
about this, the detail
he would come up with--
it rained all the time.
He was always wet, whether he
was on patrol or in a trench.
And he says his fingers
were always wrinkly,
his toes were always wrinkly.
And this obsessed him.
Now, that's the kind of detail
that you just don't make up.
>>REGINA: So he was somewhere
in Southeast Asia, apparently.
>>PEARCE: Yeah.
He said it was wasn't
Vietnam, but it was likely--
>>REGINA: But
somewhere around there.
Yeah.
>>PEARCE: And it
was that scenario.
Eventually, his
tour of duty was up.
He goes back to the States.
And he lives a really
kind of madcap life.
He doesn't settle down.
And he has a range of
different girlfriends
and so on and so forth.
And he has different jobs.
He's interested in food, import,
exporting, and things like this,
within his coma world.
And eventually he settles
down to life in a small town.
>>REGINA: In his coma world?
>>PEARCE: In his coma world.
>>REGINA: Now, he believes
in his coma world,
he's been in combat.
He's had frostbitten toes also.
>>PEARCE: Oh, yes.
>>REGINA: Where'd they
come from, in the jungle?
>>PEARCE: No, no, because--
>>REGINA: He had to
experience them somewhere.
>>PEARCE: --he worked
outside with his hands.
This is the thing about Nick.
He was what you call a
really skilled handyman.
Show him anything mechanical,
anything electric,
Nick in this coma could fix it.
The Nick in this world
couldn't change a light bulb.
Now, this Nick
has got the skills
from the Nick in the coma.
And he can now fix things.
He fixes his own car.
He fixed his
neighbor's lawnmower.
He fixed his girlfriend's
heating and ventilating system.
And he doesn't even know
how he knows to do it.
He's got a walk-in fridge
freezer at his pizza parlor.
It wasn't working.
Engineers came.
They said, scrap that.
He went in there, fiddled
with it, fixed it.
Now--
>>REGINA: And his friends are
scratching their heads, right?
>>PEARCE: He's
scratching his head
because it's blowing his mind.
How does he know this?
>>REGINA: And he did madcap
things, like you said.
He won a hot dog eating
contest, as I recall.
>>PEARCE: Well, when he settled
down to this small town--
>>REGINA: In his other life.
Tell us about his
small town life
after all the combat
and wild stuff.
>>PEARCE: He was filling
his car up at a gas station.
And there was a
very attractive girl
in the next aisle
filling her car up.
And some guy starts bugging
her, and he intercedes.
And basically, he
gets rid of that guy
and they become friends.
They become such good friends
that they have a relationship
and they settle down and
they have a baby girl.
And he discusses the
whole, the birth.
They did a New Age birth thing
in a pool and everything.
And he talks about going there
and having the baby and all
the rest of it and that life.
After a time, their relationship
started to break down.
And he was living on
his own separately.
And he wasn't well.
I don't know what
was wrong with him.
Possibly he had
problems with his heart.
And one day, he just
felt the floor drop away.
And it just fell.
And it was falling.
And he was falling
into nothingness.
But this nothingness
turned into a rainbow,
but a rainbow of colors
he had never seen before.
And as he fell through all
these different colors,
he would be that color, and he
would drop out of that color,
be soaking wet, and then
drop into another color
and drop out of that,
and be soaking wet.
And he never felt so at one with
the world, with the universe.
He said he was god.
He was the universe.
He was everything.
And then when he comes out
of it, comes out of his coma,
he finds himself
talking to the Moon,
having conversations
with the universe.
If the Nick before the coma--
the Nick before the
coma would never
imagine himself doing that.
He's just not that kind of guy.
Now he is.
Now he's fully spiritual.
And he never was before.
>>REGINA: Well, he's come
back to a world where
he has a girlfriend, where the
old Nick was her boyfriend.
>>PEARCE: Well, he came back,
and when he opened his eyes,
there's a girl sitting
beside him, holding his hand,
claiming to be his fiancée.
He hasn't got a clue who she is.
Because of the damage to his
vocal cords from the event,
he can't speak.
He can't say, hey, I think
you're in the wrong room.
I'm not who you think I am.
>>REGINA: He didn't
recognize her.
>>PEARCE: Took him ages, but he
recovered much better than many.
And he wasn't so damaged.
He didn't think he'd gone mad.
He was quite comfortable
with it in time.
But it took him a long time.
>>REGINA: How long
before he started
recognizing her and
other people in his life
or remembering anything?
>>PEARCE: It's going to come in
stages because the life he just
led, it's got sharper vision.
Everything is clearer.
Oftentimes when people have
a near-death experience,
they describe it as being
more real than reality.
Nick's alternate life within his
coma was more real than reality.
So when he comes into this
life, it's kind of fuzzy.
It's not as clear.
This feels like the dream world.
And many a person who
survived a coma have told me
that in this world, they
think they're in the coma,
that this is the coma
world and the life they
had within the coma
was their real life.
They're so confused.
Some people don't even if
they died and came back.
>>REGINA: They don't
know where they are.
>>PEARCE: They don't
know if they're dead now.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>PEARCE: And this
is one of the things
we want to do with the book,
is to show other coma survivors
that they are not alone.
The things they
experienced are being
experienced by thousands, if
not millions of people globally.
>>REGINA: And people sitting
with the people in coma
having these experiences need
to be understood as well.
>>PEARCE: Families really need
to know because the other thing
is, oftentimes, you
look sort of OK--
I mean, given you've been
in a hospital for so long.
And you kind of act OK.
But inside, you're a total mess.
And you don't feel that you
are the person that they
want you to be.
You feel like
you're having to act
to pretend to be a person that
other people expect you to be.
And they just feel
totally out of sync.
And they never settle.
And many a time,
people have told me
they wish they had
never come back.
>>REGINA: OK, so with
Nick and his girlfriend,
what happened there?
>>PEARCE: He's OK.
They're fine.
>>REGINA: They're fine?
>>PEARCE: They're fine.
They've had a kid.
>>REGINA: So he was able to
reintegrate into this world
and--
>>PEARCE: Yeah.
This one-- Nick's one
of the lucky ones.
>>REGINA: So she accepted
the new Nick, the new,
more skilled--
>>PEARCE: He eventually
got back into his old life.
Others just don't.
They come back and they feel
like they're in the plot
of the movie, "Invasion
of the Body Snatchers,"
where somebody else has--
their friends, their family,
they're not who
they were before.
They're glitchy.
They're just uncaring, unloving.
That's how they perceive it.
And they feel that they're
now in some form of hell.
And they just long to get out.
They long to get back.
And many persons, as I say,
wish they hadn't come back.
And they're quite looking
forward to leaving again.
>>REGINA: Well, I
can understand that.
So in his case, he came back.
He and his girlfriend
figured it out.
He went somewhat
back to his old ways.
But like you said, he
retained those abilities,
like the mechanical
ability, ability to fix
mechanical things, for example.
>>PEARCE: Which blows his mind.
>>REGINA: Did he bring some
of the spiritual knowledge
with him?
Or did that go away
pretty quickly?
>>PEARCE: No, he's become
a very spiritual person.
>>REGINA: Oh, good.
>>PEARCE: He's been a very,
very spiritual person.
>>REGINA: And his
girlfriend could basically
grow with him and all of that.
>>PEARCE: She was
exceptionally open to this.
And she was wonderfully kind
and caring and thoughtful.
And really, I think without
having a partner like that,
Nick would have suffered.
If he hadn't been in a
relationship, a loving,
caring relationship,
he would have
been lost, as so many
are when they come out.
>>REGINA: In your
book, you said, too,
he didn't want to let
go of his other life.
He had a life.
>>PEARCE: He was
enjoying his other life.
He'd just had a baby girl.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>PEARCE: OK, the relationship
was breaking down.
But these things
happen in any life.
But he was still--
he still loved
his daughter, no matter what.
And his daughter
now doesn't exist.
>>REGINA: So now we have--
so we're talking
about the kind of--
I'm looking here.
They call it ICU delirium
and prisoner's cinema.
So let's talk about
these two phenomena.
One, ICU delirium,
but also, prisoners
when they're placed in
solitary confinement
and a similar thing
that happens to them.
>>PEARCE: It's a
lack of stimulation--
mental, physical,
optical, human.
If you place somebody
in solitary confinement
for a lengthy
period of time, they
will start to see
strange things.
Their environment will
change around them.
If, for example, 15 minutes
in solitary confinement,
your mind will start
to create images just
to keep you occupied, I believe.
But the longer you're
in there, those images
will change from exquisitely
beautiful, oriental motifs
through to animals and
people and other scenes,
other landscapes.
And people who are in solitary
confinement can experience this.
And people are in intensive
care with no stimulation
whatsoever, staring
at a ceiling,
no one talking to
them, per se, are
having the same event happen,
that their mind somehow
is filling in the blanks,
giving them something
to occupy their minds.
So there's something
very similar.
We can learn by looking
at what happens to people
in solitary confinement,
people who've
gone into sensory deprivation,
and see what they experience
and what people experience
within intensive care.
The trouble is, no one seems
to be paying attention to this.
Somebody is in intensive
care, you're sick.
You're ill.
You'll get better.
And no one wants to discuss
the ins and outs and details--
>>REGINA: And
everything is delusions
because you might be having some
kind of weird IV painkillers
or whatever.
So they assume you're really
not in your right mind.
>>PEARCE: They assume you're
But just being in intensive
care, to be in intensive care,
you need to be near death.
So it figures you may be
having a near-death experience
down the line.
And the medication
they give you just
pushes you that much further.
It's very unusual to measure
brain activity for somebody
who's in a medically induced
coma, say during COVID,
for example.
No one was looking at
an EEG brain scanner.
If they had a brain
injury, they might.
One doctor I know who helped
us with the book, Dr. Wesley
Lee of Vanderbilt, he
became really alarmed
that things were
happening to his patients,
that he was possibly
causing a massive harm.
So he started connecting
his patients up
to an EEG brain scanner.
He was horrified.
They were deeper than
he ever imagined.
He said it was like looking
at a heart without a pulse.
It was a flatline, a
burst of suppression.
He had no idea they were sending
people that low, that far down--
horrified.
And when you go that far down,
it is not necessarily a blank.
All sorts of strange things
are happening to you.
>>REGINA: It's just not
registering on the EEG.
>>PEARCE: No.
And this goes to show that
the mind and the brain, really
not the same thing.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>PEARCE: The mind is going
off on adventures of its own
when the body is held trapped
within the hospital environment.
You don't need to be
in a coma to do that.
And I'm led to believe
that people are suffering
from different
forms of dementia,
when they feel that they're
talking to their long-dead wife
or something, they
actually are there.
>>REGINA: Oh, yes.
>>PEARCE: They've
gone back in time.
They are experiencing
these things.
Other people within
their coma told me
that they went back in time.
And they were a child
again, having dinner
with their mom and dad, holding
conversations, tasting the roast
chicken.
They were there,
100% in the moment.
I wonder if people who've
got Alzheimer's are
having similar events.
>>REGINA: Oh, I would
imagine they are.
And again, people close
to death who are conscious
are more or less
going in and out
into the other place
and this place.
And their family says oh,
my god, they're crazy.
Listen to the crazy
things they're saying.
Instead of joining them
and saying, tell me more.
I want to know where you are.
Where are you?
Who are you with?
What was it like?
>>PEARCE: The
chances are they're
having a beautiful experience
and we don't know this.
And this is another
thing about brain death.
But supposing you're
in a vehicle accident
and you're marked
down as brain dead,
but you've got a
beating heart and you're
ripe for transplant surgery.
You're ripe for harvesting.
They may be taking organs
out of somebody whose mind
is incredibly active.
Just because the
brain is flatlining
doesn't mean that they are.
They could be somewhere.
And you might be taking those
organs out of somebody who
was having a wonderfully
rich existence
and may well have come
back to this world in time.
>>REGINA: Well,
that's a grim thought.
>>PEARCE: It's a
horrifying thought.
>>REGINA: Well, let's
go into another example
because it was very
touching-- a little difficult,
but very touching, Nikki.
>>PEARCE: Yeah, Nikki.
Nikki is what you would
call a really mumsy person.
And she already had a young boy.
And she contracted
pneumonia as well.
And that turned to sepsis.
And the doctors
said to her husband,
"I don't think she's going
to survive the night."
And what we're
going to do, we're
going to place her into
a medically induced coma,
because that's the
best chance she has.
They examined her and they
realized she was pregnant.
And they said to
her husband, did you
know your wife was pregnant?
He said, "No, we had no idea.
We've been trying,
but we didn't know."
They said, "Well,
I'm really sorry.
We're going to have to
terminate the pregnancy while
she's in the coma."
Now, bearing in mind Nikki
didn't know she was pregnant,
within her coma, many times
people within a coma will say,
"I woke up within my coma and
I found myself in a particular
reality."
Nikki wakes up within her
coma and finds herself
on a train in India.
She's in an individual
carriage compartment.
And everything is laid
out for a newborn baby.
There's baby clothes, there's
nappies, there's a wash stand,
there's all sorts.
And Nikki realizes
she's pregnant.
And she gives birth
within this compartment.
And she's holding this baby.
And she looks in his eyes.
And she's blown away.
This baby has the most
stunning blue eyes
of a blue she says
she'd never seen before,
that just cut straight
into her soul.
This baby is called Baby Mason.
In that world, she
eventually finds herself
in a hospital in Scotland
where she came from.
And all the nurses
in that hospital
would come by to see Baby Mason
and his stunning blue eyes.
Nikki comes out of her coma.
>>REGINA: After how long?
She was in for a while,
a month as I recall.
>>PEARCE: Oh, she was a
long time, as I recall.
More than a month,
nearly two months.
>>REGINA: Yeah, OK.
>>PEARCE: And she was in the
hospital for a lot long--
>>REGINA: Was she
intubated the whole time?
>>PEARCE: --because of the
damage for a long time.
When she starts to regain her
faculties, she wants her baby.
She wants Baby Mason.
So she's rocking
her arms, saying--
>>REGINA: Where's my baby?
>>PEARCE: Where's my baby?
And everyone's showing her
photographs of her firstborn
son.
And she's getting really
angry, but she can't speak.
This goes on for a long time.
This is freaking
her husband out,
by the way, because he
knows she's had an abortion.
And she's rocking a baby.
>>REGINA: Does she know
yet she's had an abortion?
>>PEARCE: No, she
has no knowledge.
>>REGINA: Oh, boy.
>>PEARCE: Fast forward.
Some time later, the
doctors tell her,
when she leaves hospital
a long time after,
that she would never be able
to carry a child again, ever.
Well, she does.
She gives birth this time
in a hospital in Scotland.
The matron of the
hospital, the midwife?
>>REGINA: Is this-- no, what?
Is she in the coma or not coma?
>>PEARCE: No.
Now she's in real-- this
world, having a baby.
>>REGINA: She had a real baby?
>>PEARCE: In this world.
The baby's born.
The midwife is holding the baby.
What's the first thing
the midwife says?
Oh, my gosh.
>>REGINA: His blue eyes?
>>PEARCE: His blue eyes.
They're a blue I've never seen.
They burn into your soul.
When I look at photographs
of Nikki and her family,
everyone's got brown eyes, so
brown they're virtually black,
except this boy whose eyes are
a stunning blue, like they're
shining out of the photograph.
Now, she thinks it's not
the same child necessarily,
because they are
slightly different.
But the similarities--
>>REGINA: Could be the soul.
>>PEARCE: It could
be the same soul.
>>REGINA: The soul was
showing her what was coming.
It seems to me, I would guess--
this is just my thought--
that while she was away, so
to speak, in the other field,
they were showing
what was coming up.
And then they incarnated
into the little body
once she was pregnant.
>>PEARCE: Yes.
That's how I'm seeing it.
>>REGINA: So that's beautiful,
with the beautiful outcome.
But she was disturbed
initially when she came out.
Where's my baby?
>>PEARCE: Where's my baby?
No one could answer because
she couldn't speak for so long.
I mean, she couldn't actually
speak for more than a month.
And her husband, enormously
understanding-- again,
she was exceptionally lucky
to have the family support.
Others come out, and they
just think, you're OK.
Get over it, you know?
You look fine.
So what, you've been ill?
You've had the best
treatment possible.
Get on with your life.
And they can't get
on with their life
because maybe they're
missing a partner.
Maybe they're missing children.
Maybe they just don't feel
that they belong in this world.
And it's just horrifying.
And there's no one
they can talk to.
So as I said, one of the things
we aim to do with this book
is to show people who've been
through these experiences
that they are not alone.
>>REGINA: But even
more-- and we'll
get into that in just a sec.
Are there some that even after
they come back to this reality,
continue either in
dream time or what
seem like their
imagination, they're still
living that parallel life?
>>PEARCE: They're going
backwards and forwards,
many of--
>>REGINA: All the time.
>>PEARCE: Those who've had
the nightmarish events do not
want to go to sleep.
One or two have told me that
they will not sleep at night.
They will only doze on
a couch during the day
when there's other people
around, because they feel safe.
They cannot go to sleep at night
because they find themselves
back in that world.
Their dreams become infinitely
more vivid than they ever,
ever were before.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>PEARCE: And they go back
to these other dimensions,
to where they were.
It's OK, perhaps, if they
had a lovely experience.
Except, of course, if you're
back with your loved one
and you wake up and
you're not with them.
>>REGINA: You're
not with them, yeah.
>>PEARCE: When you find yourself
back in some hellish zone,
this just snaps their minds.
And they really think
they have gone insane.
>>REGINA: And so just to go into
the physical part of it a bit,
with someone like Nikki, who
was under for so long in a coma,
how long does it take to
recover the functions of,
first your speech, and then
your body, your muscles?
>>PEARCE: Months, if ever.
It depends how
long you were down.
The longer you were down--
they used to say
that bed rest is
the best thing for an illness.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>PEARCE: They said this
for about 2,000 years.
Now it's shown that just
one week of bed rest
can result in the loss
of 40% of lean muscle.
Everything goes.
You can lose so much muscle
that it's not noticeable
because they've pumped you
so full of fluids to maintain
your heart, your blood pressure,
and all the rest of it,
that you look fairly normal.
But you're all puffy.
There's no muscle
inside that skin.
It's just fluid, 50 pounds
excess weight in fluid
you may be carrying.
>>REGINA: Wow.
>>PEARCE: And you
can't stand up.
You can't swallow
because all the muscles
have gone in your throat.
>>REGINA: Yeah, dormant.
>>PEARCE: You're
so deconditioned.
Your diaphragm won't
work on its own.
So you have to
have help breathing
for so long after the event.
Whereas if you didn't
place somebody in a coma,
they weren't suffering a lengthy
period without moving a muscle,
literally, if you can
keep them conscious,
keep them on the
vent and conscious,
have them walk around,
walking 100 paces a day,
getting up, sitting in a
chair, interacting with people,
they don't get these
long-term problems.
And they can actually walk
out of the intensive care
unit, whereas the
majority of people who've
been placed in comas, only
leave that intensive care
unit on a gurney.
And they go to another facility.
And the doctors and nurses
in that intensive care unit
do not ever get to
follow up their patients.
When I say ever, it's
largely the case.
No one follows the medical
system, doesn't work that way.
>>REGINA: Doesn't follow up.
Yeah.
>>PEARCE: So they're
further down the line
when they're regaining
their senses,
their vocal cords.
They may wish to talk
about it to someone.
Say, hey, doc, what the hell
was that I've just been through?
And they say, oh,
don't worry about that.
It's a false memory.
You'll get over it.
Everyone has it.
Don't worry about it.
But it's like, everyone has it?
Don't worry about it?
You don't get over it.
And you shouldn't
be placing somebody
into a prolonged,
deep sedation anyway.
You cannot find a single
medical textbook that advocates
prolonged deep sedation.
Here's the interesting thing.
So more often now,
they don't like
to give people
general anesthetics
if they can give them a
local because they know
it will cause cognitive damage.
Just four to six hours
on an operating table,
you can lose up to
10 points of your IQ.
Now that's hours.
It's the same medication
that they give you
in the operating theater
that they give you in a coma.
>>REGINA: To keep you the
whole time you're sedated?
>>PEARCE: Yeah.
It depends on
availability and whatnot.
But more or less,
it's the same thing.
If they know within
four hours, you're
going to get cognitive
damage, what's
going to happen after four
weeks, eight weeks, or whatever?
>>REGINA: Or months?
>>PEARCE: Yeah.
And all this medication
is stuck in your system
because your kidneys don't
go through the 24-hour cycle
because you're not going
through your circadian rhythms,
because your brain's
switched off.
So all this med--
these meds are staying
in your system.
And if you do survive the coma,
it's still in your system.
And it can take some people
ages, weeks and weeks and weeks
to gain consciousness after
the meds have been turned off,
because there's so much
within their system.
And they never feel right again.
You can lose, say, 10 points, as
I say, on the operating table.
Imagine how many
points off your IQ
you can lose when you've been in
a coma for two months or more.
>>REGINA: Almost leaves
a person a vegetable.
>>PEARCE: Some
people-- one person
told me she came
out of a coma, she
didn't know what humans were.
She had no concepts.
>>REGINA: Wow.
>>PEARCE: Yeah.
Forget not knowing
who your family are,
not understanding
who are humans,
not understanding who she is.
Am I human?
What is a human?
Not knowing that-- and they've
existed on other planes where
they've been--
>>REGINA: Non-human,
>>PEARCE: Non-human.
They've been part of the spirit
world, part of the universe.
They felt that they
were the universe.
>>REGINA: So it sounds like one
of the major, major issues--
thank you for writing this
book and doing this research.
I know you had a tragic
event along the way
during the writing.
You lost your own daughter.
>>PEARCE: I did.
But now she feels like
part of the story.
I mean, it's strange to this--
any parent who loses a child,
it's the worst thing that
can ever, ever happen to you.
I had all of that.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>PEARCE: But at
the same time, I
realized that my daughter
wasn't dead dead?
>>REGINA: Yeah.
That was the silver lining.
You were learning all of this.
>>PEARCE: But I didn't
set out on this path.
And I realized what I had
learned in writing the book--
and I was only
halfway through it
at this point-- had
changed my mindset.
Everything that changed
my mindset is in the book.
But it's not
designed to be that.
It is an exploration
into a highly dubious
medical procedure.
And we get to follow
up the patients
and see what they experienced.
And we meet doctors and nurses
who put their hands up and say,
I've killed patients.
I've killed patients with
the best will in the world.
And we're trying to now wake
up all the doctors and nurses.
>>REGINA: And I want
to get into that that.
And so you were able to
integrate this experience
and understand, "I'm
alive and well, dad?"
>>PEARCE: Well, because I
spoke to so many people who
died and came back.
And when I say died, I
mean clinically died, as in
had to be resusced, et cetera.
Or people that were so low that
they weren't in this world.
>>REGINA: They were
essentially dead.
>>PEARCE: Yeah.
So--
>>REGINA: So I'm so glad
the timing was such for you.
>>PEARCE: So I knew my
daughter hadn't died.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>PEARCE: I mean--
>>REGINA: She just
transitioned out of this.
>>PEARCE: You could say this is
where science and spirituality
collide, because the first rule
of thermodynamics says that
energy cannot be
created nor destroyed.
We're all energy.
My daughter, Rebecca,
was a ball of energy.
Where did that go?
It had to go somewhere.
And I know it went somewhere.
And I felt enormous
comfort from that.
>>REGINA: Oh, I'm
so happy for that.
But we have a problem
with the medical system.
>>PEARCE: Massive.
>>REGINA: And like
you said, there is not
much written on this topic.
You took the time to sit
for long periods of time
to be with each of these people,
to gain their confidence,
so you could get
the full richness
of what they've been through.
So now that we know
this, first of all,
did you meet people in the
medical field that were saying,
I don't think this is right?
We're not liking what we see.
>>PEARCE: Oh, yes.
It took me a while to find them.
>>REGINA: OK, so let's talk
about what they had to say.
And a lot of times, the nurses
were the ones that were just
like, this is not good.
>>PEARCE: The nurses gets
more hands-on experience.
>>REGINA: Yes.
They're there with them.
>>PEARCE: They can see people
in coma who are not supposed
to be experiencing anything.
They see them crying
within their coma.
They're experiencing something.
What the heck's going on?
It's very distressing.
And when you switch the meds
off to bring them back out
and they are fighting and
biting and all the rest of it,
it breaks their heart.
You look into their
eyes and you see
the sheer terror in their eyes.
And out of kindness,
most doctors and nurses
will put those
meds back up again.
And they're just putting them
back into this terrible world.
It took me ages
to find a doctor--
or if I started with finding
a nurse practitioner called
Kaylee Dayton, who's
a hero in this world.
She is on an incredible
battle to change
doctors' and nurses' thinking.
She recently looked
like she was going
to lose her license because
people were complaining that she
was not putting people into
comas when they were very sick
and they really should be.
And she had to fight
her corner there.
The thing is, there isn't any
medical literature anywhere
that advocates
prolonged deep sedation.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>PEARCE: There's none.
>>REGINA: So she had
that on her side.
>>PEARCE: She had on her side.
And yet everyone does it.
And they do it out of the
goodness, out of kindness.
They do it out of kindness.
They think they're sparing
the patient trauma.
What they don't know is where
they're sending their patients.
Sometimes they're sending
their patients to heaven
and they're having a lovely,
lovely, beautiful time.
More often than not, they're
having an horrendous time.
And doctors can't explain--
no one can seem to seemingly
explain consciousness,
the one we're experiencing now.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>PEARCE: They haven't got
a chance, any chance of--
>>REGINA: They're not trained in
that, obviously, unless they--
>>PEARCE: They can't.
So they don't what to say.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>PEARCE: So they give them a
diagnosis, which is effectively
a form of mental--
they'll say you've
got a form of mental illness.
There are medications
that you can take.
There's things we can give
you to help relieve this.
>>REGINA: Well, let's talk about
the doctor that you finally
were able to connect with, and
what's happening from there,
and if you're
seeing any progress.
>>PEARCE: There
is slow progress.
Nurses are waking up to it.
About 10 years ago,
something like 86% of nurses
felt that prolonged
deep sedation was
the best thing for patients.
Now we're into the realms
of 60-something percent,
so we're slowly getting there.
Most doctors, doctors are
the hardest ones to train.
Many a time, doctors practice
experience-based medicine as
opposed to
evidence-based medicine.
So if they don't see
anything going wrong
and they think they're
doing the right thing,
they'll just keep doing it.
>>REGINA: Even if the
evidence suggests otherwise.
>>PEARCE: Except they
don't see the evidence,
because when the patient leaves
that intensive care unit,
they don't see them again.
Somebody else has to
deal with that problem.
They turn around, they're
sedating the next patient,
and then so on.
And it has become a conveyor
belt of care, intensive care.
And it's like a
conveyor belt where
no one looks over their shoulder
and sees the product coming off
the other end.
We wish to wake up doctors
and nurses very much
so to what people are
experiencing within a coma,
because it's not a bad dream.
It's more than that.
These are nothing like dreams.
>>REGINA: So you also said
in the book that you can--
some of these experiences
can be likened
to what people experience
on DMT and Ayahuasca
and things that
have been studied.
Now if doctors have something
that they can relate to,
so to speak, in the academic
world, such as studies
on the effects of
DMT, and then they're
exposed to work like yours--
>>PEARCE: But they
need to read it.
And they're not reading it.
They're all too busy.
The way the modern
medical world--
>>REGINA: No, I do get that.
But somehow, I'm just saying
in an ideal situation,
at least they would have
something to say, look at,
we're understanding this is
what some of our patients
are going through.
But you did connect
with one doctor.
Tell us a little bit about him.
It took a while.
>>PEARCE: Well, Dr.
Wesley, he's a professor
of medicine at
Vanderbilt University,
one of the finest medical
schools on the planet.
>>REGINA: Mm-hmm.
>>PEARCE: Early
on, his first job
was working in intensive care.
And all of his patients
were unconscious,
like sacks of potatoes in a bed.
And normally, you don't
get to follow up a patient.
But one particular
patient, his first patient,
had a chest wound.
So she needed to come back.
And she came back.
He was really excited to
see his first success story.
She came into the room in a
wheelchair with her mother
and she couldn't speak.
She was effectively mute.
And her mother's saying,
what's wrong with her?
She can't speak hardly.
She can't move her arms.
She can't lift anything.
She can't shower.
She can't go to the restroom.
She can't do anything.
What's wrong with her?
And he was thinking,
hold on a second.
She came in with
one complication
and we've given her a whole
other set of complications.
>>REGINA: Did they
induce a coma with her?
>>PEARCE: Huh?
>>REGINA: Did they
induce a coma?
>>PEARCE: They induced a coma.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>PEARCE: And he's thinking,
we're causing these problems.
He went off and did something
else for a while, worked
in transplant surgery.
And you have to get to know
your patients really well
for transplant.
And you have to get to
know the family really well
to know if the backup,
the support is there.
What he learned
in transplants he
brought back to intensive care.
And he wanted to
know his patients.
And he got to know his
patients very, very well.
And then he started--
he did this.
This never happens.
He connected his patients
up to an EEG brain scanner
just to see how
deeply down they were,
thinking they were kind
of like halfway down
or something like that.
He was horrified.
They were flatlining, a burst
suppression, like a heart
without a pulse.
He couldn't believe he'd
sent people that far down.
He then started
trying to find ways
of avoiding prolonged,
deep sedation,
putting somebody on a mechanical
ventilator, which most doctors
and nurses will say if you're
on a mechanical ventilator,
you must be knocked out.
You cannot tolerate
this conscious.
He figured that wasn't the case.
And instead of just knocking
people out as a matter of course
without even telling
them that you're
going to do this, he talked
to his patients and said,
what we need to do, we need
to put you on a ventilator.
But the medical literature
is quite clear about this.
You can remain conscious.
And it's much better if you do.
Would you like to be that way.
And most people would say yes.
So he would knock them out
for 20 minutes, 30 minutes,
all the rest of it,
put the tube in,
and then gently bring them out.
And in an ideal world,
you'd have a family member
sitting beside them, holding
their hand, reassuring them.
And they come out.
OK, they're feeling
a bit panicky.
They've got this weird
thing in their throat.
But in time, if you
distract their attention--
>>REGINA: Yeah, like you said
earlier, they become used to it.
>>PEARCE: Yeah, they can.
>>REGINA: And they
can move around.
>>PEARCE: Yeah.
So he realized that
his patients were
getting better as opposed to
being so deconditioned they're
either staying in
there much, much longer
in their intensive care unit, or
they're going to a care facility
down the line and never
seeing them again.
And he found that his
patients were walking out
of the intensive care unit.
And this is what Kaylee
Dayton, the nurse practitioner,
was finding.
And bit by bit, they
meet each other,
and other doctors and
nurses meet each other.
>>REGINA: I was going
to say, did their peers
find out about this?
>>PEARCE: Yeah, they do somehow.
I think the internet's got a lot
to do with that, because also,
if you go to a conference
and you stand up on a stage
and you tell a whole bunch
of doctors and nurses,
you're doing this wrong,
you're killing patients,
you're not going to
get a great reception.
You really are not.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>PEARCE: And
mostly people are--
they're laughed at or people
just think they're crazy.
>>REGINA: So it seems to me this
book serves three audiences.
It gives the people
who've been in a coma
and experienced that a chance to
see that, A, they're not crazy,
and that they're having a
very amazing experience when
they were on the other side.
Good or bad, they were somewhere
else and they lived to tell it.
You're also talking to people
who are with people sitting with
people in comas-- friends and
family of those in a coma--
saying be very careful.
They may be fully aware
of what's going on.
>>PEARCE: They may
be fully aware.
>>REGINA: They may be in
another life somewhere.
They may be fully aware.
But be very gentle and speak
as though they're alive.
And then you're speaking
to the medical industry
to say, look, this
has to change.
This is important.
>>PEARCE: But you can't.
I've been trying to interest
medical journalists in this.
I've got a book coming out.
They think I'm crazy, too.
>>REGINA: Oh, my god.
>>PEARCE: They're
telling me, hey, pal.
This has been the standard
form of medical care
for the last 50 years.
Who are you to come along and
say they're doing it wrong?
>>REGINA: Well, you took the
time to care and find out.
>>PEARCE: I'm so glad we did.
>>REGINA: I'm so
glad you did, too.
And I really hope they start
listening more and more
and that the book gets
out there, especially
among medical personnel.
It's important.
And I just want to thank
you for taking the time
to hear, to care enough about
all these people, to get
to know them and their stories.
>>PEARCE: Once I started
meeting coma survivors
and hearing their stories,
my heart went out to them.
I'm a journalist.
I've interviewed a lot
of torture survivors,
not about their torture,
but their life stories.
These people react
in the same way.
You've got to
tread so carefully.
You can't just go straight in.
"Hey, tell me about
your coma experience."
>>REGINA: No.
>>PEARCE: I started telling
people about the things
I was discovering and sharing
my information with them.
And through that, people
are opening up to me
and then telling me stories
that they never told their loved
ones, never told a living soul.
>>REGINA: They feel safe.
>>PEARCE: And they
told me and my wife,
because they want other
coma survivors to know.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Alan, thank you so much.
Thank you for writing the book.
And thank you for caring.
>>PEARCE: Thank
you for having me.
>>REGINA: Again, the title
of the book is "Coma--
A Near-death Experience,"
which is actually a gateway
to the exploration of
consciousness for people who are
hesitant to go directly
into the topic,
whether a coma is
involved or not.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on "Open Minds."
[AUDIO LOGO]